Required:
Academic and Personal Statements
The Michigan State University Graduate Application requires two statements (Academic and Personal). The College of Engineering has developed the following guidelines to assist you in developing strong academic and personal statements. These statements are used both to evaluate your application to our graduate program and to identify candidates for MSU fellowship and scholarship opportunities. You may use the same Academic and Personal statements for both the MSU Graduate School application and the College of Engineering application (see the Application Instructions for more information).

Guidelines for your Academic Statement
Your Academic Statement should be a concise statement of your plans for graduate study, your career goals, and how MSU's graduate program will help you meet your career and educational objectives. Your Academic Statement must include the following statement: "My intended area of specialization in the graduate program in (DEPARTMENT) at Michigan State University will be in _________________." If you have already been in contact with faculty or staff at MSU regarding your application for graduate studies, please list these contacts in your Academic Statement.

When preparing your Academic Statement, please include the following information:

1. Briefly describe key experiences that led you to graduate studies. Examples might include research experiences, internships, coursework or extracurricular activities.

2. Share specific, relevant examples of how these experiences helped you develop skills for success as a graduate student. For instance, you might demonstrate ways that you have synthesized knowledge from the classroom, developed research skills, communicated effectively, acted as a leader, or gained skills and responsibility over time.

3. Make a clear connection between your previous experiences and your current interest in graduate studies. If your intended area of specialization in graduate school differs significantly from your previous experiences, please briefly explain why you decided to change focus.

4. If applicable, explain any gaps or discrepancies in your academic record and share unusual obstacles or hardships that you have overcome in pursuit of your educational objectives.

5. Explain how your goals for graduate study relate to your longer-term career plans, including the pursuit of additional degrees or certifications if applicable.

Your Academic Statement should be concise, and no more than 2 pages when formatted in Times New Roman 12-point font with 1-inch margins and single line spacing.

Guidelines for your Personal Statement
Your Personal Statement should concisely describe how your background and life experiences - including social, economic, cultural, familial, educational, or other opportunities or challenges - motivated your decision to pursue a graduate degree.

When preparing your Personal Statement, please address the following questions:

1. How well do your personal goals for education and research fit with the interests of our faculty and the research activities within our department? Briefly describe research areas or questions that you find interesting and identify any specific faculty, labs or research projects at MSU that are of particular interest to you.

2. How have you demonstrated your leadership skills, or your potential as a leader? For example, you might share specific examples of how you made contributions as an officer in a student organization or how you assumed a leadership role within a team or during a professional internship. You could also discuss your potential for leadership in graduate school and afterwards by sharing your career goals and discussing your capacity to make a distinctive professional or scholarly contribution in your field.

3. How have you contributed to a diverse educational community, or how will you do so as a graduate student? How have you promoted understanding among persons of different backgrounds and ideas, or how will you do so as a graduate student? Examples might include service activities, leadership roles, education abroad, language study, etc.

4. If applicable, please describe any barriers or obstacles that you have overcome in pursuit of your educational or personal goals. Examples might include economic, social or health challenges, being the first in your family to attend college, family obligations, etc.


5. If applicable, please describe aspects of your personal background that will enhance the diversity of MSU's graduate student body, such as being multi-lingual, participating in a McNair or TRIO program, attending a minority-serving institution, etc.

6. If applicable, please describe anything else in your personal history, experience, or aspirations that distinguishes you from other applicants to our graduate programs.

Your Personal Statement should be concise, and no more than 2 pages when formatted in Times New Roman 12-point font with 1-inch margins and single line spacing.

Academic
My intended area of specialization in the graduate program in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at Michigan State University will be in digital evolution and artificial intelligence.

I have been in contact with Professor Hintze, his lab, Professor Eric Torng and several other people from the BEACON center.

1. Throughout my studies in my undergrad program I have been heavily involved in extracurricular programs, be it my two semesters abroad, one at Purdue University Northwest in 2016 where I attended the school as a student and took classes or my current semester of working as an intern at MSU to write a paper about my project here of implementing physics into the Modular Agent-Based Evolution platform MABE by hintzelab here at MSU. 


1. On top of taking classes at Purdue University Northwest I also worked as the Assistant to the Technology Administrator. I did everything from working on the website to setting up computers in the labs to designing graphics for the colleges' grants and recruitment process and even represented them at a convention at McCormick Place in Chicago.


1. After returning to Germany I started working at my University in Germany for Professor Staudacher, who is in charge of the MSU-HSK partnership (international exchange program) together with Professor Hintze here at MSU, in data analysis and data management for an international survey my school did with 2 other universities in Europe, one in Austria and one in Switzerland. 

1. As part of my bachelors course of study I also spent 5 months in the industry, working for a software development company (Skytala GmbH) in Germany where I got to experience work outside of a university campus. While I did learn a lot there and even though I liked my time there, I still preferred my previous experiences working in the university environment.

1. After finishing my internship as Skytala I was chosen to represented HSKs undergrad and grad program at gamescom in Cologne, where they hired me to work at our exhibit as a student representative presenting a project I have been working on with 2 of my friends called LEDCube. 

1. I have also taken multiple extra extracurricular courses during my years in undergrad in programming, design, and language. For Japanese, I even went to evening classes at my local community college to take the second level course since my school did not offer that anymore.
1. This summer I am planning on attending a 1 month summer semester program in South Korea to take language and programming courses there, which I have been saving money for for about a year now.

1. -> summary, As one can see, I have been exposed to many different ways how computer science is researched and applied. Obviously, computer science -> will make a difference in the future. But I was also intrigued by pretty much everything. However, I am mostly fascinated by neuroevolution AI.

4. Grading in Germany and grading in the US is quite different. None of my peers got a 4.0 at graduation, because that is almost impossible to achieve and the system is not build in a way where 4.0 is what students are aiming for. Usually good students and students that go to grad school are somewhere above a 
2.5. Another aspect that is very different to Germany, is how we get those grades. We do not get points for attendance or our homework and we don’t have quizzes or midterms. We only have a single exams for each class and that exam makes up 100% of our score, which further complicates getting higher grades, since you can’t make up for any mistakes or for having a bad day.

During undergrad, my first contact with MSU, aside from seeing the Spartan football team on TV, has in a seminar about "Evolutionary Game Theory". In this seminar I reviewed and resented a paper from Professor Hintze's paper on "Evolutionary game theory using agent-based methods" together with Jory Schossau and Christoph Adami. A few months later I had the chance to meet Professor Hintze in person when he came to my campus in Germany where he told me about not just his research, but MSU as a whole and the BEACON center. Specifically, the idea to use evolutionary optimization to bring about artificial intelligence was striking to me.

3.After having held my seminar on Professor Hintze's paper I started getting more interested in the MSU and started doing some research on it online and was impressed by what I have found out. The school is not just well known with its great reputation, it also offers one of, if not the best research in neuroevolution. Through my time here, I had the chance to work with Dr. Hintze and met many other experts in related fields (GA, genetic programming). Doing this kind of research in Germany is almost impossible. Most programs focus on deep learning or other more traditional machine learning methods and not evolutionary computation. This is better in the US, but MSU is really a front runner with respect to evolutionary computation in the context of AI.

4. For me to achieve my goal of studying in the US, which I have partially made reality with my stays at Purdue University Northwest and here at MSU, I had to go through many administrative hoops as I was the first student to "test" the programs for my school each, which meant writing countless emails, organizing everything from scratch without preexisting "pipelines". That also included saving many where and whenever I can, to be able to afford my first semester abroad, since it is a really big financial burden since school in Germany is free this was all money that I would not have had to spend had I just stayed home.


5. My previous work on university campuses here in the US (Purdue NW, MSU) and in Germany has shown me that I really enjoy working in the academic sector, and after having spent 6 months in the hintzelab at MSU, working in research I realized that I really want to pursue this further. During my 6 months here I got to learn so much by just doing research like the other grad students and I still feel like I only barely scratched the surface. After successfully implementing physics into AI evolution, I got a chance to run experiments using it, which is extremely rewarding.

Outlook: Taking all my experience into account, I want to pursue an academic career in the field of artificial intelligence and genetic algorithms. I think MSU is a great place to get my PhD, not only because of Dr. Hintze, but because CSE has so many different people (Adami, Banzhaf, Goodman, Deb, Ofria, Punch) working on all the aspects of what I am interested in.





Personal
1. I was always fascinated by the changes in human culture. When I was young, Germany just experienced the reunification, and during my trips to South Korea I had the chance to visit a country in the same situation Germany was in 40 years ago. While these are political changes, the next big social and economic changes will come from computer technology and artificial intelligence. Quite frankly, I not only want to experience that change I want to play a role in it.

2.In my free time, I have always been doing team sports since I was a kid. Starting with soccer like every other German boy, then switching over to Handball, where I even coached the peewee team (ages 5-9) for a couple of years voluntarily, to American football which I have now been doing for 7 years, where I was captain of my team during the youth team and even got selected to the all-state team to play for the Germany national championship. Since then, I have played in the highest possible league in Germany up until I came here to work. In the winter I play hockey on a self organized hobby team. I also like doing crafting projects using micro controllers, WiFi, and robotics.

2. During my time at HSK, I have never officially worked as a TA, since that was usually reserved for grad students, but me and a group made up of the more motivated students in our year organized a "study group" where we would meet and help each other out. One would always lead the session to discuss the topics in our class and where we also individually contributed by writing summaries and sharing them with all the people in the program.

3. I have been involved with the international program at my school in Germany, writing reports about my experience abroad to help other outgoing students, advising students that are interested in going abroad to the USA, and with the buddy program, where local students get assigned to incoming international students to show them around, help them when they need it, let them experience German culture and more on a voluntary basis.

3. If I get accepted into MSU I would like to work with and help the OISS with their international events. I experienced myself how difficult it can be to suddenly live abroad in a different culture and language. I would like to share my experiences with other foreign also from CSE. I think, these experience will help me as a TA. I would also like to improve the relationship my school in Germany is building with MSU by helping and advising incoming students from Germany to how things work here and helping them where they can.

Having grown up in Germany, really close to the Austrian border has already exposed me to multiple cultures, similar but yet different in more ways than you would expect. But nothing compared to my two 6 month stays in the US where I got to experience a whole new side of things. This has opened my eyes to look at things from different perspectives and not just through the eyes of a "German" - metaphorically speaking. During my time at Purdue University Northwest, I was heavily involved in their international program. I also met many students from all over East Asia. These students invited me to stay in South Korea for 1 month earlier this year. Since then I am really interested in South Korean politics and their modern history as well as the conflict with the North. Again this has opened my eyes to a whole new world, this time even more extreme than the US which made me realize how different peoples backgrounds can influence their opinions and habits and how different those backgrounds really can be.

My background, having grown up in Germany for all my life certainly helps me enhance diversity since I am fluent in English and German alike. I am also very interest in East Asia. I text with a group of friends from Japan, China and Korea daily and they have helped me get a great insight into their culture and their way of life and thinking. (I know very rudimentary Japanese and am currently trying to teach myself some Korean in my free time)

Since I tough most of my English to myself from active exposure to the language from movies, TV shows, radio, and books, I have developed a fascination with the USA. It has been my dream to visit this country for many years, and once I found out that I could do a semester abroad here, I did everything I could to make it happen. Now after having experienced it first hand, I grew even fonder to the US. My next dream is to life here for longer than just a few months, and being able to combine that with a great career path. The opportunity I see in pursuing a PhD at Michigan State University is beyond perfect.

Unsure

Had friends come visit me in Germany  


USA is cool
MSU elleinstellung: Es gibt kaum leute neuroevolution
Nach paper gemerkt wie tool MSU
Fascination not classic approach, but 
Cant do in Germany
Even in US neuro evolutiony sparse 


PNW:
1 small where I was
1 small where I am 
1 long where I want to be
How Degree helps me
Around 1 page